---
layout: post
title: '"Odd-dimensional" Approach to Hamiltonian Phase Flow'
date: 2024-03-17 00:53:16
description: This is a short note on the chapter 9 in the book <i>Mathematical Methods of Classical Mechanics</i> by Arnold.
tags:
categories: Notes
---

Let $$M$$ be a manifold. Then on its cotangent bundle $$T^*M$$ there is a canonical 1-form $$\eta \in \Omega^{1}(T^*M)$$, defined by

$$
\tau_{p} = \pi^* p
$$

where $$\pi: T^*M \rightarrow M$$ is the bundle projection. In certain local coordinate (p, q), such that the map $$\pi$$ is $$\pi(p, q) = q$$, the canonical form $$\eta$$ has the form $$p\cdot \mathrm{d} q$$, where the "$$\cdot$$" means the formal inner product.

The exterior differential of canonical form is a symplectic form on the cotangent bundle $$T^*M$$, called the canonical symplectic form and usually denoted by $$\omega$$.

In Hamiltonian mechanics, the phase flow $$\phi$$ defined by a Hamiltonian $$H: T^*M \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$$ is given by the differential equation

$$
\omega(\cdot, \dot{\phi}(t)) = \mathrm{d}H
$$

which is usually introduced via E-L equation.

However, there is another way to establish this equation and prove the basic properties of a Hamiltonian phase flow, by considering an odd-dimensional manifold $$T^*M \times \mathbb{R}$$ and the 1-form $$\eta = \tau - H\mathrm{d}t$$.

In general, we assume $$N$$ is a manifold of dimension $$2n+1$$, and $$\eta$$ is a 1-form on the manifold $$N$$. We further assume that the exterior differential of $$\eta$$ is of rank $$2n$$ at every tangent space. Note that the 1-form $$\tau - H\mathrm{d}t$$ satisfies this requirement.

Since the manifold $$N$$ is of odd dimension, we know that the "determinant" of the form $$\mathrm{d} \eta$$ is 0 and thus at each point up to scaling there is a unique vector $$\xi$$ such that

$$
i_{\xi}\mathrm{d} \eta = 0
$$

Then we have integral curves of the class of 1-dimensional subspace $$\{\lambda\xi \mid \lambda \in \mathbb{R}\}$$ on the manifold $$N$$. Here integral curves are treated as submanifolds.

> In the case that the manifold is $$T^*M \times \mathbb{R}$$ and the 1-form is $$\tau - H\mathrm{d}t$$, by direct computaion under certain local coordinates we know that, the integral curves defined above can be parametrized by $$t$$, and after doing so and projecting to the space $$M$$, the curves become the Hamiltonian phase flow defined by $$H$$.

Next we derive some invariants of the flow on the manifold $$N$$. The key idea is that, if a surface in the manifold is a disjoint union of flow lines, then the integral of $$\mathrm{d}\eta$$ must be zero on the surface.

Now, we call a integral curve an "vortex line". As we shift a closed curve along the vortex lines, we call the surface we get a "vortex tube". Applying our key idea to a vortex tube $$T$$ with boundaries $$\gamma, \gamma'$$, and utilising Stokes' formula:

$$
0 = \int_{T} \mathrm{d} \eta = \int_{\gamma} \eta - \int_{\gamma'} \eta
$$

Therefore we know that:**Conclusion**: The integral $$\int_{\gamma} \eta$$ remains unchange under the action of "shifting along the vortex lines".

> In the case of $$T^*M \times \mathbb{R}$$, we shift a closed $$\gamma$$ in $$T^*M$$ carefully so that at every moment, the closed curve stays in a slice $$T^*M \times {t_0}$$ of $$T^*M \times \mathbb{R}$$, so we know that
>
> $$
> \int_{\gamma} \tau = \int_{\gamma} \tau - H\mathrm{d}t = \int_{\gamma'} \tau - H\mathrm{d}t =\int_{\gamma'}\tau
> $$
>
> Note that, we already knowed the vortex lines are phase flows, so the closed $$\gamma$$ actually transforms to the closed $$\gamma'$$ via the 1-parameter transformation group $$\{g_t\}$$ generated by the flow. So we know that:
>
> $$
> \int_{\gamma} \tau = \int_{g_t\gamma} \tau
> $$
>
> Applying the Stokes' formula again we get:
>
> **Conclusion**: For any disk $$D$$ in $$T^*M$$, we have
>
> $$
> \int_{D} \mathrm{d}\tau = \int_{g_tD} \mathrm{d}\tau
> $$
>
> This told us that the phase flow preserves the canonical symplectic form on $$T^*M$$, which coincides with Louiville's theorem.

---

## Some Related Stuff

There are some applications of this construction. One is that, it helps us to simplify the original Hamiltonian system. In our construction, it is the form $$\mathrm{d} \eta$$ but not $$\eta$$ that determines the vortex lines, so we can replace $$\eta$$ by another form $$\eta + \mathrm{d}f$$，and solve the Hamiltonian induced by $$\eta + \mathrm{d}f$$, which may be simpler.

Besides, note that when a curve $$\gamma$$ in $$T^*M \times \mathbb{R}$$ is lifted from a curve $$c$$ in $$M$$, the integral $$\int_{\gamma}\tau - H\mathrm{d}t$$ is exactly the integral of the Lagrangian along the curve $$c$$, so this construction can be viewed as an extension of action principal. Further note that, the variation of the integral $$\int_{\gamma}\tau - H\mathrm{d}t$$ along a vortex line is the same as integrating $$\mathrm{d}\eta$$ on an "infinitely small parallelogram passing through the vortex direction" and hence is zero. This tells us that just like Lagrangian mechanics, vortex lines are critic lines of the integral $$\int_{\gamma}\tau - H\mathrm{d}t$$.
